10 brand new Instagram updates,
algorithm changes, and new features that
you need to be aware of.
Hey, Future Brock here cutting in
because I lied to you. There aren't 10
updates in this episode. There's
actually 11 updates in this episode
because a few days after I finished
recording this, I received an email from
Instagram staff about a new feature that
is being released literally at the time
that this podcast is being released. So,
I'm super excited to let you know I'm
one of the first people in the world to
let you know that you can now officially
reorder or reorganize your Instagram
profile grid. This is a feature that was
originally teased and talked about by
Instagram staff and by Adam Mosseri
about 6 months or so ago, but then on
Adam Mosseri's stories as recently as
the last month or two, he has said that
that's a program that they have
discontinued and all reports looked like
they weren't going to pursue the ability
to reorder your grid. It seemed like it
was too glitchy, too clunky, and the
people weren't using it. But, in typical
Instagram fashion, they keep us on our
toes and they keep changing things so
you can finally reorganize your
Instagram profile grid to make it look
however you want. You could use this as
a way to highlight certain posts, to
keep important sales or announcements up
at the top of your grid, or just to make
your profile look however you want it to
look. All you have to do to reorganize
and reposition any post on your profile
grid is long press on any individual
post and then click reorder grid and
then will open up a grid that you can
reorder, customize, and totally control
to make it look however you want. And
like I said, you're getting that news
here first before anyone else. So, shout
out to Instagram. Thank you so much for
Instagram staff for keeping me in the
loop. I really appreciate that. And if
you want to continue being kept in the
loop by me, consider hitting that
subscribe button because it's my job to
keep you up-to-date with the latest
Instagram news that you need to know in
simple, understandable ways.
Number one, skip rate is the most
important statistic for your Instagram
Reels. Or to say it another way, the
percentage of people who stop watching
your Reel before the 3-second mark is
now the number one kind of engagement or
the number one metric that the Instagram
algorithm is paying attention to.
Instagram has even completely redesigned
their insights layout, so the stats that
you're seeing below your reel now show
skip rate as the number one stat, the
first thing you see. But with that said,
I do want to be clear that while skip
rate is the most important thing, it's
not the only thing. In fact, there are
two other competing statistics that
determine how many views your post is
going to get and more importantly where
those views are going to come from. And
those two other statistics are like rate
and share rate. Adam Mosseri has
recently been on the record numerous
times of saying the like rate or the
amount of people out of 100 who are
liking your post determines how many
views your post will get from your
followers. So, if your post is shown to
100 people and 75 of those people like
your post, which is an extremely high
ratio, you would probably only get like
maybe 5% or 10% if you're lucky, but
let's say you got 75% of the first 100
people who saw your post also liked it,
then the algorithm thinks, "Oh, this
post is going to be really enjoyed by
this person's existing followers, and
thus the reel will be pushed out to more
of your existing followers." Shares, on
the other hand, are similar but
different in what they do. Your share
rate determines your reach to
non-followers. So, if your post is
getting more shares, if people are
sending your post to each other, your
post will be pushed out by the algorithm
to more non-followers, more new people.
Basically, the algorithm is using skip
rate to determine whether or not the
reel is even good enough to be pushed
out, and then it's using the like rate
and the share rate to determine who it's
going to be pushed out to. Update number
two, Instagram is creating their own
version of the TikTok shop. Essentially,
you are now going to be able to add
clickable affiliate links to your posts
so that people can shop anything that
you're talking about or referencing in
the post directly from your post, and
then you're going to get paid a small
commission fee for doing so. This is
something that was actually announced by
Instagram about a month or two ago, and
it has now been slowly begun to be
rolled out worldwide. So, keep an eye on
your professional dashboard to see if
you have access to this new feature.
But, once it's rolled out, it's going to
be a great way for smaller creators to
earn an income directly from Instagram.
There's a lot of people on TikTok who
are earning five or even six figures
every single month, as crazy as that
sounds, directly from the TikTok shop.
And so, I think this new Instagram
affiliate program is going to be really
awesome. And hopefully, this new
Instagram affiliate program is a step
towards Instagram allowing us to put any
links on our post. Hey Instagram, us
small business owners would love to put
clickable links on our post. I
appreciate that we can now link to other
people's businesses, but we want to be
able to link to our own as well. Real
quick, before we move on to update
number three, I want to address the
elephant in the room, or rather I should
say the hat on the head. This cowboy hat
is not part of a new alter ego or a new
reinvention of my brand that I'm going
through. This is worn intentionally
because I am hosting my first-ever
in-person live conference this year,
coming up on September 11th and 12th in
Dallas, Texas. Over the last 10 years,
I've been lucky enough to speak at
stages all over the world, and I've even
hosted a few small meetups and trainings
myself, but I've never hosted an entire
conference. And so, starting on actually
the evening of September 10th, and then
all day on September 11th and 12th, I'm
inviting you and about 400 other small
business owners and content creators who
want to grow on Instagram to join me and
a bunch of other Instagram coaches,
content experts, and small business
strategists to help you grow on
Instagram and make more money. We're
going to have a bunch of different
keynote speakers, panels of experts
where we're do hot seats, live feedback,
and live implementation. So, if that's
something that you're even remotely
interested in, DM me on Instagram with
the word Dallas, d a l l a s. And of
course, my Instagram is brock11johnson.
Oh, and while you're there, don't forget
to follow me because according to my
tracker right here, I am currently at
909,604.
But anyways, Instagram news number three
is that Instagram removed more bought
profiles than than ever have in one
single swoop. They removed over 15
million profiles like that with no
warning. And unfortunately, while they
primarily removed bot aka robot
profiles, fake profiles, spam profiles,
they removed quite a few real profiles
as well. The amount of people posting on
X and TikTok about their Instagram being
wrongfully disabled in the last few
weeks has seen a significant spike. And
the thing is, Instagram already removes
tens of thousands, if not hundreds of
thousands, of fake profiles every single
day, but they've never removed this much
all at once. And while they've since
come out and said that this was just a
routine cleanup, it leaves a lot of
speculation as to whether or not they
accidentally removed more at one time
than they meant to and they're just
trying to cover their butts, or if this
is part of a bigger purge that they're
trying to do of removing big chunks of
inactive profiles. From this, I
personally lost a few hundred followers,
which makes sense because as someone
who's been on Instagram for like 15
years and who has nearly a million
followers, it's likely that at least
some of my followers are not real
people. But I know that some people lost
hundreds of thousands and some of the
big name celebrities, like the Jenners,
the Kardashians, Taylor Swift, they lost
millions of followers in just a few
hours. Update number four might just be
a coincidence or it might be a reaction
or a response to update number three,
but Instagram just rolled out a new
selfie verification system where if you
go to your Instagram settings, you can
essentially upload a selfie, take kind
of like a face scan just like you would
use to unlock your iPhone if you use
Face ID, and Instagram will be able to
save that selfie so that in the future
you can use it to verify that you are
you. Meta hopes that this will make it
easier for people to get back into their
accounts, to prevent hacking and the
like. Of course, this has raised a lot
of concerns about Instagram having a
scan of your face and having access to
that data to use maybe however they
want. But not to side too much with our
social media overlords, I would argue
they probably already have scans of our
face from the selfies that we're posting
on Instagram anyways. So, as someone who
is constantly posting their face all
over Instagram every single day and who
really values their Instagram following,
I'm going to submit my selfies so that I
can verify my account and hopefully
protect myself against future hacks or
disablings. If you want to add your own
selfie for this selfie verification
program, all you have to do is go to
your Instagram settings and then go to
your account center. Then tap on the
button that says passwords and security.
Then click on verification selfie and
then just follow the instructions from
there. Back in 2016 when I started my
first real online business, I remember
that my head was filled with so many
what ifs. What if no one buys this? What
if I'm an impostor? What if there's no
market? What if I can't sell? What if
what if what if? What if this is all
just a big waste of time and I'm just
banging my head against the wall. But
what I wish someone told me back then is
just like you can imagine all the
negative what ifs, there are just as
many if not more positive what ifs. What
if this works out? What if this is my
breakthrough? What if this is what sets
me financially free? And thanks to one
of today's sponsors, Shopify,
it's easier than ever to turn those
positive what ifs into reality. Shopify
is the e-commerce platform behind
millions of businesses around the world
and it now represents about 10% of the
entire e-commerce market in the US. From
some of the most famous and well-known
brands in the world, like Gymshark, to
solopreneurs, Shopify has you covered.
Shopify helps you get the word out about
your e-commerce business as if you had
an entire marketing team behind you. It
easily helps you create email and social
campaigns so that you can attract
customers wherever they're scrolling.
And if you ever get stuck, Shopify has
24/7 round-the-clock award-winning
customer support. That way you can
tackle the important tasks, from
inventory to payments to analytics, all
in one place. No need to bookmark
multiple websites and sign up for
multiple tools, you can do it all in
Shopify. It makes your life easier and
it makes your business operations run
smoother. It's time to turn those what
ifs into
with Shopify today. Sign up for your $1
per month trial at shopify.com/tribe.
Go to shopify.com/tribe.
That's s h o p i f dot com forward slash
t r i b e. Instagram update number five
is another classic Instagram why are you
giving us this feature? Nobody asked for
this and it's clearly just a copy of
another app and that is what Instagram
is calling instance. Instance is
basically Instagram's copy of Be Real.
Be Real is the social media app that
absolutely blew up and took the world or
at least took Gen Z by storm in 2022.
And on Be Real you would get a daily
prompt at a specific time and everyone
would get that same prompt at that same
time. And what you were basically
supposed to do was take a quick selfie
at that moment and it was a forward and
backward selfie so they kind of captured
your whole moment and what you were
actually doing and you weren't able to
edit it or really filter it or change it
in any way and then you posted it and
everyone would kind of see what everyone
was doing. It was an opportunity for us
to all be real. Well, now in 2026
Instagram has rolled out their own
version again called instance that lives
in the Instagram DMs. The small
difference is is that there isn't a
daily prompt so you can take your
instant at any time you want and you're
not limited to just one per day. So you
can take a dozen, you can take 50 and I
do want to warn you when you open up the
instant camera on Instagram if you take
an instant it automatically sends right
then and there. So be careful what
you're snapping pictures of when you're
testing out the instant section and
Instagram also did release their own
instant app to go along with this for
those of you who are just lovers of this
new feature and who really want to use
it more. But to speak candidly I don't
really think there's much you could do
from a marketing perspective with
instance. I mean I guess theoretically
if you had a really popular brand you
could add people to your list of
following or your close friends list
which I should pause and say that's part
of the whole instance thing is it's not
that all of your followers can see your
instance only your close friends or your
mutuals can see your instance. So, it
doesn't really have a reach to your
follower base or your community. So
again, I guess you if you had a big
brand with a lot of followers, you could
add like a select group or a VIP
clientele to your own following, like
you could follow them back or add them
to some special close friends list and
then you could use your instance to like
give behind-the-scenes updates on your
but there's just not really a great or
widespread marketing use case for
instance. So, if you're a business owner
or a content creator, you can forget
about instance. Instagram update number
six came directly from Adam Mosseri and
it has caused quite a bit of confusion.
He posted saying that sending more DMs
does not help your reach and that is
true. But the way it's been
misinterpreted is that DMs in general
don't help you get more reach and that
is not true because Instagram is
optimized for direct messages. Instagram
rewards accounts that are getting more
direct messages and specifically rewards
posts that are getting sent via direct
message. So, basically what you can take
away from this is that if you are
spending hours on Instagram like
messaging people, messaging people,
DMing a bunch of people, that's not
going to directly improve your posts
views per the algorithm. Like the
algorithm isn't going to say like, "Ooh,
you messaged 40 people today. Let's give
you some more views." Now, there is some
human nature here where if you message
40 people, maybe those 40 people are now
more likely to click on your profile,
they're more likely to see what you've
posted recently. That is absolutely
possible, but algorithmically you will
not get a benefit from messaging those
people. However, if people are messaging
you in general, if more people are
messaging your account, like I mentioned
a moment ago, if more people are sending
your post via direct message, your post
will get more views and your overall
account will grow. So, should you spend
hours every single day DMing new people?
No, probably not. But should you
optimize your account and build around
DM conversations, DM automation? Yes,
absolutely. Instagram update number
seven also comes from Adam Mosseri via
his Instagram stories where he said that
deleting a post does not impact your
reach and that is true. From our
extensive testing within the
InstaClubHub, when you delete or archive
a post, it does not impact your future
posts engagement or reach. Instagram
isn't like, "Ooh, you deleted a post.
We're going to put you in Instagram jail
for a little bit." That's not true.
What's more likely happening is that if
you make a post and then for whatever
reason, maybe there was a typo or a
mistake or you just weren't in that
moment anymore and so you deleted it and
then maybe you posted a different post a
little bit later or you posted a post a
little bit later that was like a
slightly modified version of what you
originally posted, human nature is going
to cause people to be less likely to
engage because their psychology is that,
"Well, I've already engaged with this
post." Or, "I've already liked it." Or,
"I already liked this person's post
today." So, I'm not going to be a super
fan and be liking 40 of their posts
today. So, again, no, algorithmically
you will not be punished for deleting or
archiving a post, but human nature could
cause people who see that future post to
be less likely to engage with it because
they think they've already engaged with
your previous post even though it was
removed. Instagram update number eight
has me singing hallelujah from the
rooftops and that is that Instagram has
finally opened up access to their music
library to third-party apps and tools.
Translation, if you use an app to
schedule your posts in Instagram, like I
use Metricool to schedule all of my
posts in Instagram, those apps, those
tools and softwares can now access the
Instagram music library. In the past,
there have been no apps that have been
legally allowed to do this. There have
been some apps and tools that have kind
of like snuck in through a back door and
grabbed Instagram's music and applied it
to your posts, but now they are
officially approved to do so, meaning
that it's allowed, meaning that you're
not going to get punished for using that
music. You're not going to get a
copyright strike or violation.
Basically, all these popular scheduling
tools can now access the Instagram
trending audio library and you can add
any song or trending audio or even
original audio to your Reels and
schedule it that way. It's such a time
saver for someone like me because
sometimes there's a specific song or
audio or trending song that I want to
use in one of my reels, but because that
hasn't been available on the scheduling
app, I would have to schedule 99% of my
posts in the scheduling app, but then
schedule those 1% that have a specific
audio use case in the Instagram app and
it's just been very clunky and having
two places to schedule has more than
doubled my workload. And so now that I
can schedule all of these things in one
place, it's been a game changer.
And if you want a little bit more info
about scheduling tools and how to use
them, I did an episode about that a few
weeks ago and I'll link it up in the
show notes below. Speaking of scheduling
posts, Instagram now allows in-app
scheduling for trial reels. This is
another one of those hallelujah moments.
Thank you, Instagram, for giving us this
feature. A lot of people have been
asking this for a long time, basically
since trial reels first rolled out in
December of 2024. It's crazy that it was
that long ago, but now you can schedule
trial reels right in the Instagram app.
Now, you've been able to schedule trial
reels outside of Instagram using a tool
like Later, Cool, or many other
scheduling platforms since December of
2025, but now Instagram officially has
made that available in the Instagram
app. So if you create a reel that's an
experiment, if you want to test out
different hooks, if you're playing
around with a new style or format, you
can schedule that as a trial reel right
in the Instagram app. So you don't have
to worry about manually posting it
yourself or posting it at the exact
moment that you created it. And then
finally, last but least, last but worst,
the worst update that I was really
dreading having to share is directly
referencing the episode that I put out
last week about Instagram Plus.
Instagram Plus is now being rolled out
worldwide. If you're like, "What the
heck is Instagram Plus?" Again, I did an
episode on it like 2 weeks ago and you
can go check that out. Essentially, it
is a new program where you can pay a
monthly subscription to Instagram to
unlock certain benefits and features.
The one caveat or the one change from
that episode that I put out that is
different in this official rollout is
that it appears that anyone can sign up
for Instagram Plus. Originally, it
appeared that only regular Instagram
users, non-business owners, and
non-creators could sign up for Instagram
Plus, but now it appears that basically
anyone who wants to can pay the monthly
fee and get the added benefits. All of
the extra benefits are pertaining to
Instagram stories. You get some extra
insights, some extra features, some
really cool things that will help you
get more views. So, as soon as it's
available for me, I will definitely be
signing up for Instagram Plus. And we
also have one other minor change is that
when it was in testing, it was available
for like one or two US dollars per
month. And now that it's officially
being rolled out, it appears that it
will be available for four US dollars
per month. Oh, and by the way, they're
also rolling out Facebook Plus and
WhatsApp Plus if that's your jam. But
that's it for today. Don't forget to hit
that subscribe button so you can stay in
the know with the latest changes,
algorithm updates, and new features on
Instagram. It's my job to simplify it
for you so that you don't have to do the
work. You can create the content and
focus on growing your business and let
me do all the hard stuff. Let me come up
with the strategy and keep you up to
date with what you need to know. Thank
you so much for being here this week and
as always, happy networking. [music]
>> [music]